docs/benchmark-runner.rst, before:

Benchmark Runner
================

The benchmark runner is a command line application which executes the
benchmarks and generates reports from the results.

Running Benchmarks
------------------

To run all benchmarks in a specific directory:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to

To run a single benchmark class, specify a specific file:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php

To run a single method of a single benchmark class, use the ``--filter``
option:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --filter=benchMd5

Groups can be specified using the ``--group`` option:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --group=hash

.. note::

    Both ``--subject`` and ``--group`` options may be specified multiple
    times.

.. _filtering:

Filtering
---------

The ``--filter`` option accepts a regex without the delimiters and matches
against a string such as ``HashBench::benchMd5``, so all of the following are
valid:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to --filter=benchFoo
    $ phpbench run /path/to --filter=HashBench::benchFoo
    $ phpbench run /path/to --filter=Hash.*

.. _overriding_iterations_and_revolutions:

Overriding Iterations and Revolutions
-------------------------------------

The benchmark runner can override the number of :ref:`revolutions
<revolutions>` and
:ref:`iterations <iterations>` which will be executed:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --iterations=10 --revs=1000

You may specify these options multiple times.

Overriding the Bootstrap
------------------------

You can override or set the :ref:`configuration_bootstrap` using the
``--bootstrap`` option:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --bootstrap=vendor/autoload.php

Overriding assertions
---------------------

Use the ``--assert`` option to introduce or override assertions:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --assert="stat: mode, value: 10"

This will assert that ALL variants must have a mode less than 10. For more
information on assertions see :doc:`assertions`.


Generating Reports
------------------

By default PHPBench will run the benchmarks and tell you that the benchmarks
have been executed successfully. In order to see some useful information you
can specify that a report be generated.

By default there are two reports ``default`` and ``aggregate``, and they can
be specified directly using the ``--report`` option:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --report=default

See the :doc:`reports` chapter for more information on how you can
configure reports.

.. note::

    If you want to suppress all other output and only show the output from the
    reports you can use the ``--progress=none`` option. This is especially useful when
    piping a report to another program.

.. _retry_threshold:

Retry Threshold
---------------

PHPBench is able to dramatically improve the stability of your benchmarks by
retrying the iteration set until all the deviations in time between iterations
fit within a given margin of error.

You can set this as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --retry-threshold=5

The retry threshold is the margin of error as a percentage which is allowed
between deviations.  Generally the lower this value, the higher the stability,
but the longer it will take for a set of iterations to be resolved.

By default the retry threshold is disabled.

You may also set the retry threshold in the
:ref:`configuration <configuration_retry_threshold>`.

Changing the Output Medium
--------------------------

By default PHPBench will output the reports to the console using the
``console`` output. The output can be changed using the ``--output`` option.
For example, to render a HTML document:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --report=default --output=html

Example of HTML output:

.. image:: images/html.png

See the :doc:`report-renderers` chapter for more information.

Deferring Report Generation
---------------------------

You can store benchmark results which can then later be used later to generate reports.

There are two ways to do this: Firstly you may dump the results to an XML
file, secondly you can use a storage driver to persist them.

To dump the benchmark results to an XML file use the ``--dump-file`` option:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --dump-file=report.xml

You can then generate reports using the ``report`` command:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench report --file=report.xml --report=default

Alternatively (or in a addition) you may use the storage driver as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --store

Then generate reports using a *query*:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench report --query='benchmark: "MyBench"' --report=aggregate

This method is highly mighty. See the :doc:`storage <storage>` chapter for
more information.

Comparing Results
-----------------

You can compare the results of two or more sets of results using the `compare`
report.

First you should generate a suite result document for each separate
implementation and specify a *context*:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ # .. configure for implementation A
    $ phpbench run --context="Impl. A" --dump-file=impl-a.xml
    $ # .. configure for implementation B
    $ phpbench run --context="Impl. B" --dump-file=impl-b.xml
    $ # .. configure for implementation C
    $ phpbench run --context="Impl. C" --dump-file=impl-c.xml

Now you can use the `report` command and specify the `compare` report to
compare the results for each implementation side-by-side:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench report --file=impl-a.xml --file=impl-b.xml --file=impl-c.xml --report=compare
    +---------+------------------+----------+---------+--------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
    | context | benchmark        | subject  | group   | params | t:Impl. A | t:Impl. C | t:Impl. B |
    +---------+------------------+----------+---------+--------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
    | Impl. A | HashingBenchmark | benchMd5 | hashing | []     | 2.4448μs  | 4.3039μs  | 1.5003μs  |
    +---------+------------------+----------+---------+--------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

Progress Reporters
------------------

By default PHPBench issues a single ``.`` for each benchmark subject executed.
This is the ``dots`` progress reporter. Different progress reporters can be
specified using the ``--progress`` option:

.. figure:: images/blinken.gif

   blinken progress logger.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --progress=classdots

The built-in progress loggers are:

- ``verbose``: The default logger, format: `[R<retry nb.>] I<iter nb.> P<parameter set nb.> <mean|mode per rev.> <standard deviation per rev.> <relative standard deviation per rev.>` ).
- ``travis``: Similar to verbose, but with no fancy console manipulation. Perfect for travis.
- ``dots``: Shows one dot per subject (like PHPUnit).
- ``classdots``: Shows the benchmark class, and then a dot for each subject.
- ``blinken``: Highly visual progress logger.
- ``histogram``: Shows a histogram with 8 vertical levels and 16 bins for each
  iteration set.

.. note::

    PHPBench is aware of the ``CONTINUOUS_INTEGRATION`` environment variable set
    by travis. If this variable is set then the default logger will
    automatically be changed to `travis` and the `dots` progress logger will
    not do any fancy stuff.

All of the progress reports contain the following footer:

.. code-block:: bash

    3 subjects, 30 iterations, 30000 revs, 0 rejects
    min [mean mode] max: 0.84 [1.13 1.12] 1.66 (μs/r)
    ⅀T: 33987μs μSD/r 0.16μs μRSD/r: 14.92%

It provides a summary of the minimum, mean, mode, and maximum subject times, given
microseconds per revolution. ⅀T is the aggregate total time, μSD/r is the mean
standard deviation, and μRSD/r is the mean relative standard deviation.

.. warning::

    These summary statistics can be misleading. You should always verify the
    individual subject statistics before drawing any conclusions.

Configuration File
------------------

A custom configuration file can be specified with the ``--config`` option.  See
the :doc:`configuration` chapter for more information on configuration.

Commit message:

Show failures in travis/verbose loggers

docs/benchmark-runner.rst, after:

Benchmark Runner
================

The benchmark runner is a command line application which executes the
benchmarks and generates reports from the results.

Running Benchmarks
------------------

To run all benchmarks in a specific directory:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to

To run a single benchmark class, specify a specific file:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php

To run a single method of a single benchmark class, use the ``--filter``
option:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --filter=benchMd5

Groups can be specified using the ``--group`` option:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --group=hash

.. note::

    Both ``--subject`` and ``--group`` options may be specified multiple
    times.

.. _filtering:

Filtering
---------

The ``--filter`` option accepts a regex without the delimiters and matches
against a string such as ``HashBench::benchMd5``, so all of the following are
valid:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to --filter=benchFoo
    $ phpbench run /path/to --filter=HashBench::benchFoo
    $ phpbench run /path/to --filter=Hash.*

.. _overriding_iterations_and_revolutions:

Overriding Iterations and Revolutions
-------------------------------------

The benchmark runner can override the number of :ref:`revolutions
<revolutions>` and
:ref:`iterations <iterations>` which will be executed:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --iterations=10 --revs=1000

You may specify these options multiple times.

Overriding the Bootstrap
------------------------

You can override or set the :ref:`configuration_bootstrap` using the
``--bootstrap`` option:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --bootstrap=vendor/autoload.php

Overriding assertions
---------------------

Use the ``--assert`` option to introduce or override assertions:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --assert="stat: mode, value: 10"

This will assert that ALL variants must have a mode less than 10. For more
information on assertions see :ref:`assertions`.


Generating Reports
------------------

By default PHPBench will run the benchmarks and tell you that the benchmarks
have been executed successfully. In order to see some useful information you
can specify that a report be generated.

By default there are two reports ``default`` and ``aggregate``, and they can
be specified directly using the ``--report`` option:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --report=default

See the :doc:`reports` chapter for more information on how you can
configure reports.

.. note::

    If you want to suppress all other output and only show the output from the
    reports you can use the ``--progress=none`` option. This is especially useful when
    piping a report to another program.

.. _retry_threshold:

Retry Threshold
---------------

PHPBench is able to dramatically improve the stability of your benchmarks by
retrying the iteration set until all the deviations in time between iterations
fit within a given margin of error.

You can set this as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --retry-threshold=5

The retry threshold is the margin of error as a percentage which is allowed
between deviations.  Generally the lower this value, the higher the stability,
but the longer it will take for a set of iterations to be resolved.

By default the retry threshold is disabled.

You may also set the retry threshold in the
:ref:`configuration <configuration_retry_threshold>`.

Changing the Output Medium
--------------------------

By default PHPBench will output the reports to the console using the
``console`` output. The output can be changed using the ``--output`` option.
For example, to render a HTML document:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --report=default --output=html

Example of HTML output:

.. image:: images/html.png

See the :doc:`report-renderers` chapter for more information.

Deferring Report Generation
---------------------------

You can store benchmark results which can then later be used later to generate reports.

There are two ways to do this: Firstly you may dump the results to an XML
file, secondly you can use a storage driver to persist them.

To dump the benchmark results to an XML file use the ``--dump-file`` option:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --dump-file=report.xml

You can then generate reports using the ``report`` command:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench report --file=report.xml --report=default

Alternatively (or in a addition) you may use the storage driver as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --store

Then generate reports using a *query*:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench report --query='benchmark: "MyBench"' --report=aggregate

This method is highly mighty. See the :doc:`storage <storage>` chapter for
more information.

Comparing Results
-----------------

You can compare the results of two or more sets of results using the `compare`
report.

First you should generate a suite result document for each separate
implementation and specify a *context*:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ # .. configure for implementation A
    $ phpbench run --context="Impl. A" --dump-file=impl-a.xml
    $ # .. configure for implementation B
    $ phpbench run --context="Impl. B" --dump-file=impl-b.xml
    $ # .. configure for implementation C
    $ phpbench run --context="Impl. C" --dump-file=impl-c.xml

Now you can use the `report` command and specify the `compare` report to
compare the results for each implementation side-by-side:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench report --file=impl-a.xml --file=impl-b.xml --file=impl-c.xml --report=compare
    +---------+------------------+----------+---------+--------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
    | context | benchmark        | subject  | group   | params | t:Impl. A | t:Impl. C | t:Impl. B |
    +---------+------------------+----------+---------+--------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
    | Impl. A | HashingBenchmark | benchMd5 | hashing | []     | 2.4448μs  | 4.3039μs  | 1.5003μs  |
    +---------+------------------+----------+---------+--------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

Progress Reporters
------------------

By default PHPBench issues a single ``.`` for each benchmark subject executed.
This is the ``dots`` progress reporter. Different progress reporters can be
specified using the ``--progress`` option:

.. figure:: images/blinken.gif

   blinken progress logger.

.. code-block:: bash

    $ phpbench run /path/to/HashBench.php --progress=classdots

The built-in progress loggers are:

- ``verbose``: The default logger, format: `[R<retry nb.>] I<iter nb.> P<parameter set nb.> <mean|mode per rev.> <standard deviation per rev.> <relative standard deviation per rev.>` ).
- ``travis``: Similar to verbose, but with no fancy console manipulation. Perfect for travis.
- ``dots``: Shows one dot per subject (like PHPUnit).
- ``classdots``: Shows the benchmark class, and then a dot for each subject.
- ``blinken``: Highly visual progress logger.
- ``histogram``: Shows a histogram with 8 vertical levels and 16 bins for each
  iteration set.

.. note::

    PHPBench is aware of the ``CONTINUOUS_INTEGRATION`` environment variable set
    by travis. If this variable is set then the default logger will
    automatically be changed to `travis` and the `dots` progress logger will
    not do any fancy stuff.

All of the progress reports contain the following footer:

.. code-block:: bash

    3 subjects, 30 iterations, 30000 revs, 0 rejects
    min [mean mode] max: 0.84 [1.13 1.12] 1.66 (μs/r)
    ⅀T: 33987μs μSD/r 0.16μs μRSD/r: 14.92%

It provides a summary of the minimum, mean, mode, and maximum subject times, given
microseconds per revolution. ⅀T is the aggregate total time, μSD/r is the mean
standard deviation, and μRSD/r is the mean relative standard deviation.

.. warning::

    These summary statistics can be misleading. You should always verify the
    individual subject statistics before drawing any conclusions.

Configuration File
------------------

A custom configuration file can be specified with the ``--config`` option.  See
the :doc:`configuration` chapter for more information on configuration.

Exit codes
----------

The following exit codes can occur:

- ``0``: Everything was fine.
- ``1``: Errors encountered in benchmarks.
- ``2``: Assertion failures.
- ``255``: Internal error
